You guys are hardcore.
Excellent.
It's been a long, long week,
but we got somebody here who's
going to make it all worthwhile.
Doug Davidson is going to talk
to you about some of the really
cool stuff in Cocoa text.
So help me welcome to
the stage Doug Davidson.
Okay, thanks Jason.
I'd like to thank you all for coming.
I like to think we've saved
the best for the last.
As I said, I'm Doug Davidson,
and I'm here to talk to you
about the Cocoa text system.
Now,
anyone who's worked with Cocoa at all
has seen the text system in action,
because in almost any case
where a Cocoa application
puts up text on the screen,
the text system is responsible
for it in one way or another.
So the Cocoa text system is
at the heart of a lot of the
things that we do in Cocoa.
Now, what I'm going to do in this
session is first of all,
I want to go briefly through some of
the features of the Cocoa text system,
then we're going to dive in and
explain how to start using them.
But the primary emphasis that I want
to have is on what I think is the most
interesting part of the text system,
and that is customizing it for
your particular application,
because one of the principal
design points of the Cocoa text
system is that it should be
highly customizable throughout.
Now, as far as features go,
if you've used TextEdit,
you're probably familiar with
a lot of the features of the
Cocoa text system already,
because most of what you get with
TextEdit are things that you will get for
free whenever you use the text system,
provided that you check the
appropriate boxes in Interface Builder.
So showing is better than telling,
so let's move on over to the
demo and let's take a look.
Now, what I have here is my version
that I just wrote of a very
simple editor that you've probably
seen demoed over and over.
Very little code,
but it has all the features
that you would expect,
features that we know and love.
But now, this is running on Panther,
so we might expect something more.
For example,
In Panther, the Find panel is now
built into the text system.
It took me zero lines of
code to add this to my app,
and it's fully functional and
actually quite full-featured.
Also for Panther,
we have completely redone the text ruler.
The old confusing line spacing
controls that nobody can understand
are gone by popular request.
In their place, let me
We have this neat little pop-up here
that by default allows you to pick
single spacing or double spacing.
Or in fact, just about any kind of
spacing you might like.
Now,
we certainly didn't have user interface
in Jaguar for most of these features,
and in fact some of them are
completely new for Panther.
So, for example,
the line height multiple.
Let's try picking one
and a half line spacing.
And you'll notice that when we go back,
that's now showing up on the pop-up
so I can get to it easily again.
We also have this other little
pop-up over on the other side.
This is the styles pop-up.
And what this allows you to do is to save
any styles that you might like or use
frequently so you can have them right at
your fingertips whenever you want them.
Now, for demo purposes,
I've already preloaded this with a
number of styles because I want to
show off some of the new attribute
features that we have in Panther.
For example, underlines.
In Jaguar, I think we had two
different underline styles.
In Panther, we have, I think it's 30.
For example,
you could get a double underline or a
dotted underline or colored underline,
basically just about
anything you'd expect.
Also,
we have taken the strikethroughs and
separated them from the underlines and
given them the same sort of options.
So you can get double strikethrough,
co-ed strikethrough, and so forth.
What else?
We now have outlines, common request,
but we don't just have
a single outline style.
We have a fully adjustable
parameter so that you could get,
for example,
A heavier outline, if you like,
or a lighter outline.
But that's not all.
You also get to set independently
the colors of the outline and
the interior of the text so
that you can get some effects,
say, like this.
If you went to the Cocoa Update talk,
you heard about the new class
NSShadow that allows the setting
of a drop shadow on drawing,
but it's also available
as a text attribute.
So you could have a configurable shadow,
maybe a little tiny shadow,
I'm not sure if you can
see it on this big monitor,
or perhaps a somewhat larger,
somewhat blurred shadow,
or essentially any shadow you want.
Now,
what I'd really been intending to type
here was something more spectacular,
but I forgot how to spell spectacular.
But that's okay in Panther,
because I just start typing and complete.
And then, oh, there it is.
Now, this text completion
is fully customizable,
and I'll be showing a
demo of that later on.
But for this particular application,
I decided I wanted to write
zero lines of code for it.
And so all I got is the
default built-in functionality,
which uses the system spelling
dictionary plus anything I happen
to have in my document already.
So let's put it all together.
I have a somewhat more
complicated style here.
So a little something more
spectacular for Panther.
Oh yes, there's one more thing.
When I go to save this document,
I can save it as rich text or plain text,
just as you'd expect,
but there's one more option here.
I can also save this as a Word document.
So this simple 50-line application
can read and write Word documents.
As a matter of fact, in Panther,
any Cocoa application can now read
Word documents without changes of code,
provided it was using the standard
init with path or init with URL APIs.
Writing Word documents is
a little more difficult.
You need to have one
line of code for that.
As far as reading Word documents,
we go back as far as Word 6,
I think it is.
For writing,
we use the most recent format,
which is roughly Word 97 and later.
You may have heard that Word has a
new XML file format called WordML,
and we read that, too.
Now, I have to caution you, of course.
There is going to be some loss of
fidelity because the Cocoa text
system does not support all the
features that Word does and vice versa.
Most notably, for example,
the text system doesn't
have support for tables yet.
Whereas before,
what you have to do is open
up the document in Word,
save it as RTF,
then open it in a Cocoa application.
Now we've cut out that step entirely.
You can just open it
directly in Cocoa application
and get the same effect.
Okay.
So now let's go back to the slides.
What I want to do is review
briefly the new features
that we've added for Panther.
We have the new attributes and
attribute features that I've showed you,
the outlines, shadows, underlines,
strikethroughs, and so forth.
We also have a couple of new attributes,
the tooltip and cursor attribute
that allow you to set a tooltip or
a custom cursor and associate it
with a particular region of text.
And we have a little something
called the link attributes that
I'll be showing you later on.
We have new paragraph style features,
such as the new line spacing
options that I showed you,
and there are also some new
tab stop features that I won't
have time to go into right now.
We have some whole new API sets.
We have NSLift generator
and NSATS typesetter,
I'll be discussing more later on.
And then we have the most
obvious and visible new features,
like the new font panel
you've probably seen,
the new text ruler I showed you,
the find panel completion,
reading and writing Word documents.
And there are quite a few other
individual APIs that I may not be
able to go into in detail here,
but I wrote a number of pages
of release notes about them.
So I urge you to take a
look at the release notes.
And take a look at the headers,
because all the new things
for Panther are clearly
marked in the headers.
And I think the release notes should go
into quite a bit of detail describing
what these things are and what they do.
One other thing that's
new for Panther is WebKit.
And some of you may be wondering,
what's the relationship
between text system,
text views, and WebKit and web views.
Well, the short answer is that
they're different in much the
same way that a web browser is
different from a word processor.
The fact of the matter is that
most web pages today don't
look very much like text pages.
And WebKit is -- they're full of frames
and plug-ins and JavaScript and so forth.
And WebKit is aimed squarely at the
display of the most complex HTML.
So if what you want is to display a
chunk of HTML in your application,
probably what you want is a web view.
On the other hand,
if you want -- what you
want to show is really text,
or in particular,
if you want editability,
then you want a text view.
So, if you want to show a text view,
you want to show a text view.
And if you want a text view,
And if you want to show a text view,
you want a text view.
you want to show a text view.
And if you want to show a text view,
you want to show a text view,
you want to show a text view.
And there's a sort of
a bridge between them,
and that is that the
Cocoa Text System does have
an HTML import feature,
which is necessarily lossy,
but it does at least
allow you to get the text,
rich text content of
HTML into the text system.
So now it's time to dive in and start
showing you how to use all these
features and new features and so forth.
But before I do that,
I want to put some structure
and organization on my
discussion of the text system.
And the paradigm I like to use is model,
view, controller.
Yes, you've heard it many times.
Within the context of the text system,
the model is the text document,
the characters and their attributes.
The view is the text view you've seen
that handles the user input and display.
And the controller classes
handle everything in between.
You can do quite a lot in the text
system just by dealing with NSTextView,
as we'll see.
The TextView is the visible face of
the text system for most purposes.
What a TextView is,
is a representation of a single
region within which text is laid out,
such as a page,
and it handles all of the display
and all of the user interaction
for the text on that page.
If you have, say, multiple pages,
then you would have multiple TextViews,
and those sibling TextViews would know
about each other and work together and
have a certain amount of shared state.
There are a few other classes
that come in and work with the
text system at the view level.
For example,
the standard Cocoa Ruler classes are
used in displaying the ruler for text.
And then there's a class
called NSTextAttachmentCell.
It's a special kind of cell that is
used for displaying the icons or images
corresponding to inline attached files.
And the most visible new features for
Panther come in at the view level.
The updated font panel I mentioned,
the new text ruler,
the find panel completion,
and the cursors and tool
tips that I've talked about.
[Transcript missing]
So what are these attributes?
The standard ones that are recognized
and understood by the text system
are listed in an AppKit header called
NSDistributedString.h in the AppKit.
And they include most
of what you'd expect:
fonts, colors, underlines,
strikethroughs, and so on and so forth.
There are a few things that don't appear
as individual separate attributes.
For example, bold and italic are not
separate attributes.
They're treated as traits of the font.
And we use NSFontManager to
add these traits or remove
these traits from the font.
Also, anything that is part
of a paragraph style,
like margins, tab stops, line spacing,
and so forth,
is not a separate attribute,
but instead it's a feature
of an NSParagraphStyle object
that encapsulates the text.
It encapsulates all that information.
And then there are some special
attributes that deal with view
and display and interaction,
like the cursor and tooltip
attributes that I mentioned before.
And then there's a link attribute
that's used whenever text has
a hyperlink associated to it,
and the attachment attribute that's used
when there's an inline attached file.
We have quite a lot of
new features in Panther.
The attribute level,
we have the stroke width and
stroke color that I demonstrated
when we used for outlines,
the new underline styles and colors,
strike through styles and colors,
the shadows,
a couple I haven't mentioned though,
bleakness and expansion,
you can look those up,
and the cursor and tooltip attributes.
So now we have enough to talk about
more or less the first level of
customization of the text system,
where you deal with the view and
the model layers only and you don't
worry about what comes in between.
So the first thing you should think about
when trying to customize at this level
is receiving notifications from the text
view or acting as a text view's delegate.
The text view's delegate
is actually very powerful.
For example, the text view's delegate is
notified whenever the user
makes any change to the text,
and the delegate has the opportunity
at that point to accept or
deny or modify that change.
So the text view's delegate can control
whatever the user does in the text view.
The text view's delegate is also
notified if the user makes a change
to the selection in the text view,
and again has the opportunity to
accept or deny or modify that change.
And there are many other text view
delegate methods that give the
delegate control over a lot of
things that are going on with the
text view and its user interaction.
But in some cases you'll find you want
to do some kind of customization that
you can't do as a text view's delegate.
At that point,
then it's time to start thinking
of subclassing NSTextView.
If you went to the tips and
tricks session earlier today,
I gave an example of a custom
subclass of NSTextView.
That was intended to do
some additional drawing.
It was drawing bubbles around the text,
somewhat the sort of way that iChat does,
for example.
And you can also subclass to
customize the user interaction in
the text view a number of other ways.
I'm going to give an example
in a minute that will,
I think, show clearly the distinction
between delegation and subclassing
and working with NSTextView.
Now,
when you go to customize the text system,
it will often happen that you'll
want to make modifications to
the text that you're working on.
And the way this typically
works in the text system is that
user-initiated changes to the text
go first to the text view and then
through it to the text storage,
whereas programmatic changes
will typically go directly
to the text storage.
But they all end up with
the text storage in the end.
And the text storage, as I've said,
is a mutable attributed string.
When you want to change it,
you just use mutable attributed
string methods to alter it.
But, as I also said,
it has this additional feature
that it notifies the rest of the
text system whenever it changes.
So if you're going to be
making multiple changes to the
same text storage in a row,
what you'll want to do is wrap those in
a call to begin editing and end editing.
And what that will do is cause
those notifications to be
coalesced into a single one at
the end for efficiency's sake.
You can also subclass in as text storage,
but that's a little more difficult,
and I'll be talking about that later on.
So, let's go over to the demo again.
I want to show an example
of customizing TextView,
both as delegate and subclass.
So we have here,
we're going back to text completion,
and you'll recall I told you that text
completion was fully customizable.
So here's a custom completion that
you might use if you were working in,
say, financial reporting.
Because what this will do,
if you type in the name of a
company and try to complete,
it will complete the name of the company.
It will also add the stock ticker symbol.
And if there's more than one,
then you get a list and you get to pick.
And you'll notice that these
things are -- the stock tickers
here are blue and underlined.
And in fact, when I mouse over them,
I get a pointy hand cursor,
which is a clue that
these are actually links.
And I chose to set them up
as links to the stock price.
I see we're not doing so well.
So how do we do this?
Let's see if we can
take a look at the code.
I've set this up as a
TextView that has both a delegate
and it's also a custom subclass.
What the TextView's delegate can
do in the context of completion,
the delegate is allowed to have
complete control over the list
of completions that's presented,
their order,
and which one is first selected.
That's the first thing we're doing.
As a delegate,
we implement TextView completions
for partial word ranges and so forth.
We have a dictionary here whose
values are the company names
and keys are the ticker symbols.
The possible completions are just
the whole list of company names,
all the keys in the dictionary.
All we do is go through and see if
the partial word that we're completing
has a prefix to one of those.
Then we add it to the
list of completions,
and we're done.
So that's what you could do with
completion acting as a TextView delegate.
But we also did something more.
When the completion was
actually accepted and confirmed,
we added in the stock ticker
symbol and made it a link.
Now,
there are a number of methods associated
with completion that are designed
to be overridable by subclasses,
and one of them is this method
and search completion for partial
word rank that handles putting
the completion back into the text.
Now, there's one thing I just skipped
over that I probably should mention,
and that is this.
We made a call to set
link text attributes.
Now, when you set link text
attributes on a text view,
this is a special set of attributes
that the text view will automatically
apply to text that has a link on it.
So in this case, we're making it blue,
and we're giving it an underline,
and we're adding a
pointing hand cursor to it.
So all text that has a link
will automatically get those
attributes applied to it.
So now our subclasses method
for inserting completion,
what it's going to do is it gets told
whether this is a tentative completion
or a final confirmed completion.
And if it's a final confirmed
completion and we have the
stock ticker symbol for it,
then what we're going to do is
let it be inserted as usual.
We call it super method.
And then we're going to create
an appropriate URL for the link.
Actually, first what we do is modify
the string to be inserted,
so we add the ticker symbol to it.
Then we get a URL and we add this link
attribute to the appropriate range
corresponding to the sticker symbol.
And then the TextView automatically
does the rest,
applying the blue color outline
and cursor to it because we
set the link text attributes.
You could also have complete
control over the list of completions
presented as a TextView subclass,
but I chose to present it
in a delegate in this case,
just to make the distinction clear.
Okay, so let's go back to the slides.
You could do quite a bit with the
Cocoa text system by dealing only with
the view and the model layers and never
worrying about what happens in between.
But at some point you're probably
going to get curious and wonder how
it is that the Cocoa text system
actually goes from the characters and
their attributes in the text storage
to the pixels you see on the screen.
Before I discuss that,
I'm going to need to
introduce another concept,
and that is the glyph.
Now, characters in the text storage
are Unicode characters,
but a glyph is something different.
A glyph is a single displayable
element of a particular font.
It has no meaning outside of the
particular font that it's in.
So, in some sense,
the job of the text system,
at least at the controller level,
is to take the characters and attributes
in the text storage and to convert
them to a sequence of glyphs and
their positions that can be displayed.
That's not quite as
simple as it might sound.
For example,
the relationship between characters
and glyphs is not one-to-one.
It's potentially many-to-many.
So, for example,
if we look at the character
we recognize as an accented A,
acute accented A,
in Unicode this can be represented
either as a single accented
A character or as two characters,
an A and an accent.
Likewise, depending on the font,
it might potentially be represented
by one accented A glyph or it
might be represented by two glyphs,
an A and an accent.
And the text system has to
keep track of all that and the
relationship between the two,
and then it has to calculate the
appropriate positions for the glyphs
so that we end up with the final
displayed result that is the appropriate
glyphs in the appropriate places
with the appropriate attributes.
So what are the classes that are
actually involved in doing this?
The principal class that's
involved here is NSLayoutManager.
NSLayoutManager is the
heart of the text system.
It is the controller class
in the Cocoa text system.
I said that the text storage notified the
rest of the text system when it changes.
Well, it's the LayoutManager that gets
notified by the text storage.
And when that happens,
the LayoutManager keeps track
and it arranges for all the
necessary work to be done.
The LayoutManager is the controller
class that's involved here.
The principal class that's
involved here is NSLayoutManager.
NSLayoutManager is the
heart of the text system.
It is the controller class
in the Cocoa text system.
I said that the text storage notified the
rest of the text system when it changes.
Well, it's the LayoutManager that gets
notified by the text storage.
And when that happens,
the LayoutManager keeps track
and it arranges for all the
necessary work to be done.
I'll be discussing these
in more detail later on.
And then the LayoutManager stores all
the information about the sequence of
glyphs and where they're positioned.
And it's actually the LayoutManager
that does the display,
arranges for them to be
displayed as necessary when
requested to do so by the view.
So how is it that text gets from
the characters and attributes
in the text storage to the
pixels you see on the screen?
There are four separate steps.
I want to go through them in order.
First, attribute fixing,
where we make sure the
attributes are consistent.
Second, glyph generation,
where we convert the characters
and their fonts into glyphs.
Third, layout, where these glyphs are
broken up into lines.
The glyphs are positioned in the line,
the lines are positioned in the line,
and the lines are positioned in the line.
Fourth, display,
where the glyphs are marshaled
up and sent down to Quartz to
actually be rasterized into bits
on the screen or displayed on the
printer or PDF or what have you.
And in the Cocoa text system,
all these processes are usually
done lazily and on demand.
So what typically happens is that
although these occur in this order,
they get pulled through from the end.
So what will happen is that
the text view will be required
to redisplay a certain region.
So it will call on the layout
manager to read the text.
And the layout manager,
in order to do that,
needs the layout information.
So the layout information
has to be calculated.
But to do the layout,
you need to have generated the glyphs.
So it causes that to be done.
But before you generate the glyphs,
you need to have fixed the attributes.
So it causes all that to occur in order,
pulled through from the end.
Attribute fixing.
Now attribute fixing is actually
performed by the text storage.
There are several different kinds.
First of all, there's font fixing,
where we make sure that the font
that's applied to a particular
character is actually a font
that can render that character.
And we will,
the Cocoa text system will substitute
fonts as necessary in order to get one
that can render the specified character.
And then there's paragraph fixing.
You remember I talked about the
NS paragraph style attribute
that encapsulates all the
paragraph style level features.
Well,
what we need to do is make sure that that
attribute is actually constant over the
length of an entire paragraph of text.
We can't have more than
one for a given paragraph.
And then there's attachment fixing,
which makes sure that the attachment
attribute applies only to the attachment
character that it's supposed to.
And can all these be customized?
Yes, they can be customized by
subclassing NSText storage and
overriding the appropriate methods.
Next, glyph generation.
Now, when the Layout Manager is
informed by the text storage
that things have changed,
it will have to invalidate
a certain portion of any
information that it already has.
due to that change.
You can also manually cause the layout
manager to do this invalidation if
you want to force some recalculation.
And so then when that
information is needed again,
the layout manager will call on the
glyph generator typesetter to recalculate
the information about what the glyphs
are and where they were positioned.
And it's glyph generator that
actually does a conversion from the
characters and fonts to the glyphs.
And then the layout manager stores the
sequence of glyphs that it has produced.
And because the relationship between
characters and glyphs is not one to one,
the layout manager also has to keep
track of the relationship between
character indexes and glyph indexes.
And if you ever need that information,
you go back to the layout
manager and ask it.
Then comes layout,
and the layout manager calls on the
typesetter to perform the layout.
The typesetter goes back to the layout
manager to find out what the glyphs are,
because they've already been generated,
and it goes to the text container
to determine the geometry of
the page to figure out where
it can put lines on the page.
The typesetter is the class that
actually calculates the layout.
It breaks the text up into lines,
positions the glyphs in the lines,
and it is also allowed at
this point to insert or change
glyphs in the glyph stream.
For example, if it's doing hyphenation,
it may need to insert a hyphen glyph.
And then the typesetter calls back to the
Layout Manager and tells it what it did.
It tells it where each line ended
up and which glyphs ended up in
the line and where the glyphs
are positioned in the line,
and the Layout Manager stores
that information.
Then display.
When the text view needs to
redisplay a certain region,
first thing it does is go to
the layout manager and ask
it what glyphs are involved,
what glyphs are needed to display
that particular region of text.
And then it calls back on
the layout manager again,
first to cause the layout
manager to display the background
appropriate to those glyphs.
That's typically things like
the selection rectangles.
And finally,
to ask the Layout Manager to display the
glyphs along with any other additional
drawing that's needed like underlines,
strikethroughs, attachments,
and so forth.
Now it's not just
NSTextView that can do this.
Your custom view can do it too.
In fact, there's an example,
developer examples appkit
circle view that does this.
There are a couple things you have to
remember if you're going to do this.
When you call on the Layout
Manager to do this sort of drawing,
you must already have focus
locked on a flipped view.
If your view is flipped and
you're in your drawRank method,
that's automatic.
Another thing you have to keep in
mind is that the Layout Manager keeps
track of all its positions relative
to the origin of the text container.
So, the Cocoa text system is a
very interesting tool for the
positions of lines and so forth,
which may not be the same
as the origin of your view.
In fact, it often isn't.
So, you'll have to translate
between coordinate systems.
And it keeps track of the location of
positions of glyphs relative to the
origin of the line in which they live.
So, there's a certain amount of
translation that has to go on,
and we'll see an example of that.
So now we have enough to talk
about what is more or less the
second level of customization,
where you are actually getting
information about where individual pieces
of text are positioned on the screen.
And the source of all such
information is the Layout Manager.
Layout Manager knows all.
The Layout Manager,
if you need to go from a character
range to a glyph range or vice versa,
which you will often need to do,
you call on the Layout Manager to get
the position of a particular glyph or
position and size of a particular line,
or to go backwards,
given a position to locate a glyph,
or given a rectangle to
locate the glyphs in it.
All that sort of thing,
you call on the Layout Manager.
There are quite a few methods to do this.
It's also possible to subclass the
Layout Manager if you want to customize
any of its particular features.
For example,
if you have a custom attribute
that you want to affect drawing
at the individual glyph level,
one way to do that is by
subclassing NSLayoutManager.
I'll give an example of that.
Let's go on over to the demo again.
Let me see if I can bring this up.
So here I have some Chinese text.
These characters are
beautiful and concise,
but one thing that they
don't necessarily do,
except especially for someone like
me who doesn't read very well,
is make it obvious how they're
intended to be pronounced.
So over the years,
there have evolved a number of
schemes for adding some sort of
phonetic annotation to characters.
In some cases, the annotation appears
above the characters.
or in some cases,
it appears beside the characters.
But either way,
it makes it crystal clear how these
are intended to be pronounced.
For example, this is .
: But fortunately,
the dictionary where I got these
pronunciations also gave me some clue
as to the meanings of these characters.
So we can display that,
and that will help us to recognize this
quotation here from The Art of War,
which might be rendered as,
"If you know your adversary
and you know yourself,
you need not fear the result
of a hundred battles."
So the text system doesn't
have any built-in facilities
for this sort of thing.
This is all customization.
How do we do it?
Let's take a look.
What I've done is to define
some custom attributes,
and I have some code that is fairly
simple and kind of simplistic,
actually,
that sets these attributes based
on a dictionary that I provided it.
What I'm going to show you -- actually,
all this code should be
available for download from ADC,
if not now, then very soon.
What I have done is subclass
NSLayoutManager and override
the primary draw method,
draw griff range at point.
And so what we're going to do
here is we're given a glyph range.
We need to look at some
of these attributes.
So first we convert it
back to a character range.
Now, before we do any of our own drawing,
we're going to call on the super method
to actually draw the original glyphs.
And then the next thing we're going
to do is draw all these annotations.
And it's actually not that complicated.
What we do is go through the text,
the characters in the text storage,
and we look
What we do is here,
we look for any characters
that have our custom attribute.
We also have calculated what glyph
corresponds to this character,
and where it's located
as far as the point,
and where its line lives.
And then,
you'll remember I talked about all
the translation that needs to be done.
Well,
to get from the coordinates of a glyph,
as the layout manager gives them to you,
to coordinates in your view,
you need to translate by the origin of
the line rectangle that it lives in,
and by the origin of the container.
and all that is available.
That is a very standard idiom.
And we also get some information about
the glyph and the font that we're
going to use in doing our sizing.
So the value of this attribute is
just the little string that we're
going to show as an annotation.
And basically all we do is figure
out a rect where we want to put it
and some attributes to draw it with,
and just draw it.
The bottom annotations for the
meanings are essentially the same.
The right annotations,
the are a little more complicated
because in that case each glyph
has to be positioned individually.
But I'll let you look at that
once you've downloaded this.
That, I think, is all of this.
So let us go back to the slides.
Now we come to the most
difficult part of the talk,
where we discuss NS-TypeSetter.
As I said, NS-TypeSetter is a class that
actually performs the layout.
And that's what mainly
makes this topic so complex,
because layout is inherently complex.
NS-Typesetter itself is a
mostly abstract superclass.
If you wanted to provide your
own complete layout engine
and entirely replace the one
that the text system uses,
then you can subclass
NS-Typesetter directly.
But most people are probably
not going to want to do that.
The main concrete subclass of
NS-Typesetter is NSATS-Typesetter,
which performs the
standard system layout.
And if you want to use
that for the most part,
but make some minor modifications to it,
then you can subclass NSATS-Typesetter.
Now this is new for Panther.
A new class, lots of new public API.
NSATS-Typesetter actually existed before,
but it was completely private.
The methods were all different,
so you can't use it.
before Panther.
Now, what generally happens is that when
the layout manager needs a certain
portion of text to be laid out,
it calls on the typesetter and asks it
to lay out a certain number of lines.
Then the typesetter goes back to the
layout manager to get information about
the glyphs that need to be laid out,
and it goes to the text container to
get information about the geometry,
where the lines can be placed.
It does its thing.
It does all the layout and
it calls back to the layout
manager and tells it what it did.
It tells it where each line went,
which glyphs went in the line,
and where all the glyphs
are positioned in the line.
At this point,
the typesetter is allowed to insert or
modify glyphs in the glyph stream and
it tells the layout manager about that,
too.
For example,
As I said, if it's doing hyphenation,
it may need to insert a hyphen.
Now, for those of you who
have been waiting for it,
now in Panther, we have implemented
truncation with ellipses.
That is now implemented
at the typesetter level,
so you can use it.
In that case,
the typesetter would need to work
with the glyph stream to make
sure the ellipsis is in there.
It may happen in a number of cases
that certain glyphs need to be modified
if they appear at the end of a line.
In that case, the typesetter would have
to do that at this stage,
because it's only the typesetter that
knows where the end of the line is.
And NSATS typesetter has a number
of methods and they're divided
into several different groups
for several different purposes.
There is an interface that is
intended primarily for subclassers
who want to modify layout in the
text system and they're allowed
to do various things to that,
I'll discuss later on.
There is also a glyph storage
interface to NSATS typesetter that
has a slightly different purpose.
The purpose of the
glyph storage interface,
it may be that in some cases you want to
use NSATS typesetter by itself without
any of the rest of the text system.
And what the glyph storage interface
does is to encapsulate all the
calls that the layout manager,
that the typesetter, excuse me,
makes back to the remainder
of the text system.
So you can override that and replace
all this interaction with your own
custom method of storing glyphs
or storing text or what have you.
And what this allows you to do is to
make use of the system line layout
algorithms without having to use
any of the rest of the text system.
if that is what you want to do.
But in most cases, if you're going to
subclass in ATS typesetter,
it's going to be because you want
to make some custom modification
to the layout that it does.
So what you can do with this
is that you can be notified
as the text is being laid out.
You're allowed to modify the position
and size of the line fragments
as the lines are being laid out.
You get some control over line breaking,
hyphenation, and so forth.
So I have a demo of this.
Let's go back to the demo machine.
This is actually the
same demo I had before.
One thing you'll notice is that as
the annotations appear and disappear,
the height of the line
changes correspondingly.
To do that,
I actually subclassed NSTypeSetter.
and implemented a
particular method it has.
This is also the means, for example,
by which iChat makes sure that
the paragraphs of text line
up with the little pictures
of your buddy on the side.
And what this method does is the
typesetter subclass gets called
whenever a line has been laid out,
and you get passed by reference
the rect for the line,
the glyph range, and the used rect,
that is, the portion of that rectangle
that was actually occupied
by text and the baseline,
and you get a chance to modify
them before they get sent
off to the layout manager.
So what we're doing
here is fairly simple.
Again, we're passed in the glyph range.
We need to convert it
back to a character range.
And we go through it,
and all we do is we look for our custom
attributes and see if we find them,
make a note,
and we look for the font that they
appear in so we can calculate how
much space is actually needed.
If we found any and we have some space,
then we add it to the line
fragment and adjust that.
[Transcript missing]
So the line fragment expands,
but only for those lines that actually
have the characters with this attribute.
All the rest are unaffected.
All right, let's go back to the slides.
So now it's time to wrap up.
Of course,
there's no longer any opportunity
to go to any further sessions,
but you will presumably be
able to view all of these on
DVD or by some other means.
There have been a number
of other sessions on Cocoa.
Cocoa Update session discussed
briefly some of the changes
we made to text for Panther.
The Cocoa Tips and Tricks session,
as I mentioned earlier today,
had an example,
actually several examples that made
use of text for various things,
for adding, in particular for adding
drawing to the text view.
So if you're interested in that,
you should probably take
a look at that session.
And you can take a look
at the code from that,
which is, we have verified,
now available for download already.
And there are a number of other sessions
that may be interesting for those
of you who want to deal with text.